http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20140829-a-parable-of-the-dispossessed
99 Homes, starring Andrew Garfield and Michael Shannon, is a key film about the human cost of the rec
Stand aside, Gordon Gekko. Michael Douglas’s Mephistophelian Wall Street corporate raider may stand as the emblem of 1980s rapacity, but now he has a successor for the credit-crunch era: Rick Carver (Michael Shannon), a granite-hearted real estate wheeler-dealer who views life as a game of Monopoly. Like Gekko, he’s a charismatic, unapologetic cheerleader for making as much money as the US government’s loose regulations will allow – plus some that they won’t. And like Gekko he has a knack for phrases that sum up the spirit of the age. True, none of them is quite as pithy as the catchphrase attributed to Gekko – “Greed is good” – but there are a few contenders: “They build homes. I own homes.” “Don’t get emotional about real estate.” “America doesn’t bail out losers. America was built by bailing out winners.” Another trait that he and Gekko have in common is that while Carver is ostensibly the film’s villain, you can bet that in years to come, a certain breed of would-be entrepreneurs will exalt him as a role model.He even has a naive young protege, just as Gekko did. In 99 Homes, Andrew Garfield stars as Dennis Nash, a single father who shares a bungalow in Orlando, Florida with his mother (Laura Dern) and son. Shortly before the recession hit, he sunk his savings into equipment for his construction firm, but now that no one needs his services, he can’t keep up his sub-prime mortgage repayments. One afternoon, there’s a knock on his door from the all-too-appropriately named Carver, accompanied by two burly men from the sheriff’s office. Wearing a tailored linen jacket, and sucking on a blue-tipped e-cigarette that may well become as iconic as Gekkos’s braces, Carver calmly informs Nash that the bank now owns his house, and that he and his mother have a couple of minutes to grab some belongings and leave the property for good. It’s an astonishing, gut-wrenching scene, with as much adrenalin as a fight sequence in an action movie – but in this case the hero can’t punch or shoot his way out of the situation. He has no choice but to abandon the home he’s lived in his whole life.After a grim night in one of Florida’s worst motel rooms, Nash resolves to buy the house back, and he agrees to do some odd jobs for the very man who threw him out of it. Initially that means shovelling sewage and mending an air-conditioning unit, but soon – slightly too soon to be credible – Carver makes the new recruit his right-hand man. A matter of weeks after Nash himself lost his home, he is learning the many shady ways to profit from turfing other people out of theirs.It’s a propulsive, streamlined, yet weighty drama. Its director and co-writer, Ramin Bahrani, is a Venice festival favourite who has made several muted parables about America’s dispossessed, but 99 Homes proves that he can also make thrillingly urgent mainstream entertainment without turning his back on the harsh realities of life on the breadline.If the film has a shortcoming, it’s one it shares with Wall Street: just as Charlie Sheen’s Bud Fox was less compelling than Gordon Gekko, Nash is nowhere near as captivating as Carver. One factor, undoubtedly, is Shannon’s remarkable Frankenstein’s Monster physiognomy. His cliff-like chin and hooded eyes make Garfield look as soft and pink as a blancmange in comparison. Beyond that, though, Carver is a fascinating character: a driven self-made man who argues angrily that it’s the government, the banks and the over-mortgaged home-owners who are to blame for their financial troubles, and that he has every right to exploit them. You may not agree with him, but he’s certainly got a stimulating opinion, and a formidable way of putting it across. Nash, meanwhile, is merely a drippy, standard-issue good guy who does an unpleasant job against his better judgement. His mother and son are just as one-dimensional. In the film’s hurried and shakily plotted second half, all the viewer can do is watch Garfield overplay Nash’s kicked-puppy anguish, and wait for the inevitable moment when he decides that enough is enough.Still, if 99 Homes’ conclusion is a disappointment after its breathless opening scenes, it remains a punchy, intelligent drama that is sure to be remembered alongside the Dardenne brothers’Two Days, One Nightas a key film about the human cost of the recession. And in Rick Carver, it has the towering embodiment of America’s economic crisis. If only we’d got to see more of him.★★★★☆If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to ourFacebookpage or message us onTwitter.