http://www.bbc.com/news/education-19293380
A-level clearing: Your stories
Students across the are chasing remaining university places after getting their A-level results yesterday.Thousands didn't get the grades they needed, or did better than expected, and so the rush is on to secure a place on a course.BBC News website readers have been telling us what it's been like since they got their results.I got A*A*AA but I still haven't got a place in any university. I applied for five and only got accepted to one, which I didn't want to go to.I want to study economics here in the North or in London where I have family, so I can't just go anywhere.I've looked through clearing, but there isn't anything suitable. I want to do economics, and really wanted to go to LSE, but they don't accept business studies A-level  for that course.I was also rejected from Durham and Newcastle. They say it's because of competition, but I know people in my year who got Bs and Cs and got into economics at both.I got excellent grades overall, altogether about 600 Ucas points, but still couldn't get accepted.I guess I'll have to try again next year. LSE say I should do chemistry or physics as an extra A-level, but even then they can't guarantee me a place.I wanted to study physics at Liverpool University or Nottingham Trent, but I didn't get into either. I needed at least a C in maths, and I was just two marks off.So yesterday I spent most of the day going through clearing, calling up universities. As soon as they hear you got a D in maths, they're not interested.I did get an offer for computer science, but I really want to do physics.  I got an offer from Swansea but with an extra year, a foundation year.I'm gutted as I got Bs otherwise and just two marks off the grade I needed. But I'm not going to dwell on it.  I want to go into astronomy or astrophysics as a researcher, I've been into planets since I was a kid, so I guess I am going to Swansea.I originally applied for medicine and I had 2 interviews, but no offers.I got A*A*AA but still have no university place. I was predicted these grades but universities interview you first before accepting you, and after mine, I was rejected by Liverpool and Cardiff.I'm going to try through clearing, but I think I will do a gap year and try again next year. I'll get some more medical-related work experience and practice my interview technique and hopefully I'll get in next year.I opened my results this morning with mixed feelings indeed - I'd met the offer for my first choice, the University of York, but the grades themselves shocked me.For the past two years, philosophy A-level has been one of my best strengths, and at AS I got an A result. So imagine my bewilderment upon seeing "B" and "D" for my two philosophy exams, when I'd worked so hard and wrote the best essays I felt I'd ever done.This is not the first time this has happened. After a re-mark, my C shot up to a high A, and this happened to many other students that same year.I fully intend to get the scripts returned, to see for myself how an examiner could justify my work as worthy of a D. I'm furious about it.The distress experienced upon seeing such uncharacteristically bad grades is horrible, and I cannot believe that students like me have had to endure this twice.I am just lucky that the bad marking didn't affect the overall outcome, otherwise my entire future would be looking very different right now.I'm having a horrendous time.  I got A*AA in maths, further maths and physics, the best grades in my college but I still didn't get into my first choice, Warwick.I am still waiting for an update from Ucas - I need a yes or no from my second choice. Until I get that, I can't enter clearing.I have met the requirements for my second choice, but they say I have not and now I am being reviewed along with everyone else "who have missed their grades".I may have got excellent grades but I feel like I am at the bottom of the pile.