http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-17769990
Abu Qatada timeline
For almost two decades, Abu Qatada has been in the UK, resisting every effort of the government to deport him to Jordan. BBC News looks back at the long-running battle of the cleric, described as a "truly dangerous individual" and a "key UK figure" in al-Qaeda related terror activity.Jordanian national Abu Qatada, real name Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, claims asylum on his arrival in Britain on a forged passport.The father of five is recognised as a refugee and allowed to stay in Britain.The "radical cleric" issues a fatwa, or religious edict, justifying the killing of converts from Islam in Algeria, and their wives and children.Abu Qatada applies for indefinite leave to remain in Britain.The cleric is convicted in his absence on terror charges in Jordan and sentenced to life imprisonment.Abu Qatada advocates the killing of Jews and praises attacks on Americans in a speech in London.Abu Qatada is questioned over his alleged connections to a German terror cell. Police find £170,000 cash in his home, including £805 in an envelope labelled "For the mujahideen in Chechnya".Abu Qatada becomes one of Britain's most wanted men after going on the run from his home in Acton, West London.The cleric is arrested at a council house in South London and detained in Belmarsh high-security prison.He gets conditional bail and is placed on a control order.Abu Qatada is arrested under immigration rules as the government seeks to deport him to Jordan.He makes a video appeal to the kidnappers of British peace activist Norman Kember in Iraq. The recording, made inside Full Sutton prison near York, was broadcast in the Middle East.The Court of Appeal rules that deporting Abu Qatada will breach his human rights, because evidence to be used against him in Jordan may have been obtained through torture.The immigration tribunal grants the preacher bail but orders him to stay inside for 22 hours a day.Abu Qatada is released from Long Lartin jail in Worcestershire and moves into a £800,000 four bedroom house in West London.The Muslim cleric is rearrested after the Home Office tells an immigration hearing of fears that he plans to abscond.Abu Qatada's bail is revoked by the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) after hearing secret evidence that the risk of him absconding has increased.Five Law Lords, in a landmark judgement, unanimously back the government's policy of removing terror suspects from Britain on the basis of assurances from foreign governments. It is ruled that Abu Qatada can be deported to Jordan to face terror charges.The preacher is awarded 2,800 euros (£2,500) compensation by the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) after the judges ruled that his detention without trial in the UK under anti-terrorism powers breached his human rights.ECHR judges rule the cleric can be sent back to Jordan with diplomatic assurances but he cannot be deported while "there remains real risk that evidence obtained by torture will be used against him".SIAC rules he can be released on bail despite posing a risk to national security.David Cameron and King Abdullah of Jordan agree on the "importance of finding an effective resolution" to this case, Downing Street says.Abu Qatada is released on bail from Long Lartin prison.He is re-arrested as the government prepares to deport him to Jordan. Home Office officials thought Abu Qatada's three-month deadline to appeal to the ECHR expired on 16 April. Home Secretary Theresa May tells MPs about fresh assurances that the radical cleric will get a fair trial.The ECHR says it has received a last-minute appeal from Abu Qatada's lawyers. They say the deadline to appeal ran out on 17 April. Mrs May disputes this.The radical cleric loses his attempt to make an appeal to the European Court of Human Rights against his deportation. The court says a panel of judges of the Grand Chamber found the appeal had arrived in time - but refused it. Home Secretary Theresa May says she is confident Abu Qatada will soon be "out of Britain for good".Abu Qatada is refused bail by the Special Immigration Appeals Commission's (Siac) president Mr Justice Mitting. He says allowing him to be on bail during heightened security at the 2012 Olympic Games would be "exceptionally problematic".He loses a further bid to be freed at the High Court.Abu Qatada wins his appeal to Siac after lawyers claim he would not get a fair trial in Jordan. Home Secretary Theresa May brands the ruling "deeply unsatisfactory". The government believes the wrong legal test was applied and is to appeal.The cleric is released from Long Lartin prison. He is subject to strict bail conditions, including only being allowed out of his house between 08:00 and 16:00, having to wear an electronic tag, and being restricted in who he meets. He is also banned from using mobile phones and computers.Home Secretary Theresa May wins permission to appeal against the decision to block the deportation.It is revealed that a legal aid bill for Abu Qatada stands at £515,778 and is rising.Abu Qatada's family win an injunction preventing protesters from demonstrating directly outside their home. His wife and five children were granted an anti-harassment order by a High Court judge in London. The judge says demonstrations can still take place but they have to be more than 500 metres from the Qatada home in London.The radical cleric is arrested by UK Border Agency officials for allegedly breaching his strict bail conditions.Home Secretary Theresa May's appeal is heard. Lawyers for Mrs May argue at the Court of Appeal that the block on deporting Abu Qatada from the UK should be lifted.Mrs May loses her appeal against the ruling preventing the deportation of Abu Qatada. Judges at the Court of Appeal rule he could face an unfair trial involving evidence obtained by torturing others if he is returned to Jordan. The Home Office says it will appeal further. Abu Qatada can now apply to be released from prison. He is being held under immigration legislation, but this can only be used if there is a realistic prospect a person is going to be deported - a prospect this ruling undermines.The Court of Appeal refuses permission for Mrs May to appeal to the Supreme Court. The government says it will now apply directly to the Supreme Court for permission.The home secretary tells MPs the government has signed a mutual assistance treaty with Jordan - complete with guarantees on fair trials - to ensure Abu Qatada can be deported. The treaty will come into play if the Supreme Court rejects the government's request.Abu Qatada's lawyer, Edward Fitzgerald QC, tells the Special Immigration Appeals Commission that his client would voluntarily return to Jordan if the Jordanian government ratifies the treaty drawn up with the UK government.Jordan's parliament approves the treaty with the UK. A week later, the country's King approves the treaty, paving the way to it becoming law.The treaty becomes law in the UK.The treaty finally becomes law in Jordan after it is officially published by the government. UK Home Secretary Theresa May resumes deportation proceedings.