http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-29757988
Afghanistan's battlefield slang
Most wars can be identified by their own slang, and Afghanistan was no exception. As British combat operations come to an end, BBC defence correspondent Jonathan Beale and Thomas Martienssen pull together a short lexicon of words and abbreviations used during the conflict.ALLYTerm for a battlefield fashionista - desirables include having a beard, using a different rifle, carrying vast amounts of ammunition, being dusty and having obscene amounts of tattoos and hair. Special forces are automatically Ally.ANAAfghan National Army. AlsoANSF- Afghan National Security Forces, used to include various police.BARMADrills and procedures for searching for IEDs (improvised explosive devices), normally using a vallon detector. AlsoARMOURBARMA- using a heavily armoured vehicle to drive over unsearched ground; and "unofficially"FARMERBARMA- using a local guide to escort a patrol through a village for their knowledge of local IED placements.BADMINUsed to describe a soldier with poor organisational skills or inability to look after their kit properly.BUTLINSA joke name given to the main British base of Bastion in Helmand. A reference to its relative luxuries and facilities including mess halls, shops, showers and even Pizza Hut, in contrast to life in the smaller and harsher bases. Also dismissively known as ATR (Army Training Regiment) Bastion.CRAP-HATA unit judged as inferior. For the Parachute Regiment, that includes every other unit and regiment.CROWNew soldier recently out of training. Hardly a term of endearment.FACForward Air Controller. A soldier on the ground who directs fire from the air using specialist equipment and radios.GANNERSRoyal Navy and Marine reference to Afghanistan. Soldiers talk about Afghan, but rarely the full name Afghanistan.GUCCIA reference to a desired piece of kit, as in: "That sleeping bag is a Gucci piece of kit."HLSHelicopter Landing Site. The main one at Camp Bastion was called Little Heathrow.EHLSis an Emergency Helicopter Landing Site - often used to evacuate injured troops.IDFIndirect fire. Occurs when there is no direct sight of target. Generic term for enemy artillery or mortar fire.IEDImprovised explosive device, otherwise known as roadside bomb. SimilarlyVBIED- vehicle-borne improvised explosive device andDBIED- donkey-borne improvised explosive device.JINGLYTRUCKReference to brightly coloured Afghan trucks - often decorated with chains and bells that make them jingle as they drive along.LASH VEGASSame idea for what was the British HQ at Lashkar Gah. More luxuries than most  FOBs (forward operating bases).MERTMedical Emergency Response Team - medical evacuation helicopter with medics on board. Normally a Chinook.RATSRations or a description of unpleasant conditions - such as being wet, cold and hungry.BALTICis another term used to describe being cold.TACSATRadio used to call in either FastJets or Apache helicopter in support of troops.TERPAn Afghan interpreter. A shortened US expression also used by the British military.TERRYAs in Terry Taliban. Common reference to the enemy. The American expression is T-Man.TICTroops in Contact - one of a long list of Army abbreviations. TIC is used to relay over radio when troops come under fire.UGLYAn Apache gunship helicopter - an obvious reference to its menacing appearance.Subscribe to theBBC News Magazine's email newsletterto get articles sent to your inbox.