http://www.bbc.com/sport/cricket/14875865
Alastair Cook thrilled with England one-day progress
England captain Alastair Cook was full of praise for his side after they clinched the one-day series against Indiain a rain-affected tie at Lord's.Cook,who was named skipper in May, has now won both of the series in which he has led the team, withEngland having beaten Sri Lankaearlier in the summer."To win the two series in fantastic," said Cook. "It is all about winning no matter how you get there."It's also been impressive to see the strength of character."England lead the five-match series 2-0 with one game still to play in Cardiff.Cook singled out Ravi Bopara's contribution after his fellow Essex batsman scored a brilliant 96 to guide the team to the brink of victory in highly confusing circumstances."Ravi played an outstanding knock to get us back into the game," Cook said. "It is great to see him delivering on the international stage and to get that tie for us."There was initial confusion over the outcome after a third interruption for rain terminally ended England's chase of 280-5, on 270-8.But in consultation with the Duckworth-Lewis method it was deemed that the teams could not be separated - just as at Bangalore in their World Cup group match back in March.Bopara admitted the weather had complicated the chase, adding: "With rain about we didn't know when to accelerate."You weren't sure whether to take to ones and twos or take on the big shots. But I'm very happy. We got the tie which clinches the series but it's extremely disappointing that we didn't end up winning," he said.Cook also revealed England would know the extent of Stuart Broad's triceps injury in the next 48 hours.Broad was unable to finish the final over of India's innings after pulling up with the injury, which could rule him out from skippering England in next week's two Twenty20 internationals against West Indies."He went for a scan on his triceps," Cook said. "It is such early days so we are not sure the extent of the injury. We have our fingers crossed for him. We'll know in the next 48 hours."India captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni remained philosophical."I won't really get down about it," he said. "That would have been our first win of the series. Things have not been on our side. It has been a tough series for us, nothing has gone our way but we take it with an open heart. We will give it our best shot in Cardiff."