http://www.bbc.com/sport/cricket/32879081
Alastair Cook: England team effort earned win over New Zealand
England captain Alastair Cook said a team effort after a "rocky road" earned his side victory in the first Test against New Zealand.A 124-run win at Lord'scame in the monthEngland sacked coach Peter Mooresand again told Kevin Pietersen hewould not be considered for selection."It's been a rocky road over two weeks. From the moment we turned up on Monday the spirit has been good," said Cook."It's been a team effort. We're pleased to play with such freedom and passion."Media playback is not supported on this deviceEngland fought back from 30-4 on the first morning and from conceding a first-innings deficit of 134 to record their fifth win in seven Test matches.Joe Root made scores of 98 and 84 and Cook 162 in England's second innings and Ben Stokes 92 and 101, an 85-ball hundred that was the fastest made in a Lord's Test match.With New Zealand set 345 to win, they were bowled out for 220, Durham all-rounder Stokes taking 3-38, including the wickets of Kane Williamson and Brendon McCullum in successive deliveries."The way he has played has been so exciting," said opener Cook, 30. "All of the plaudits will be for his second-innings hundred, but his first-innings 92 was brilliant in tough conditions."We've always known how talented he is, but he also works incredibly hard. Full credit goes to him and he should enjoy this."Cook also paid tribute to the England supporters, with Lord's packed by a raucous crowd that took advantage of cut-price final-day tickets."It was a really good day played in front of a great crowd," said Cook. "I've never heard Lord's sounding like that."When Ben got two wickets in two balls, Stuart Broad ran past me and said 'this is amazing' and it was. It was an incredible day."England's day began with the news thatTrevor Bayliss is in negotiations to take the job vacated by Moores's departureand Cook said he is keen for an appointment to be made."We're a little bit in limbo," said the Essex batsman. "We're not quite sure what's happening behind the scenes and we were slightly taken by surprise."I need to speak to Andrew Strauss to find out what's going on."England caretaker coach Paul Farbrace, who worked under Bayliss with Sri Lanka, praised the Australian and said he wants to remain involved with the national team."He's an old-fashioned cricket coach, who likes working in the nets," said Farbrace. "He's quiet but when he says something it counts."He's a good man who is very knowledgeable and has experience all round the world. I want to be involved in the future, whatever the role is."