http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-14118853
Algeria profile - overview
Algeria, a gateway between Africa and Europe, has been battered by violence over the past half-century.More than a million Algerians were killed in the fight for independence from France in 1962, and the country has recently emerged from a brutal internal conflict that followed scrapped elections in 1992.The Sahara desert covers more than four-fifths of the land. Oil and gas reserves were discovered there in the 1950s, but most Algerians live along the northern coast. The country supplies large amounts of natural gas to Europe and energy exports are the backbone of the economy.Algeria was originally inhabited by Berbers until the Arabs conquered North Africa in the 7th century. Based mainly in the mountainous regions, the Berbers resisted the spread of Arab influence, managing to preserve much of their language and culture. They make up some 30% of the population.Algeria profile homeRead more country profilesCountry profiles compiled byBBC MonitoringPart of the Turkish Ottoman Empire from the 16th century, Algeria was conquered by the French in 1830 and was given the status of a an overseas province. The struggle for independence began in 1954 headed by the National Liberation Front, which came to power on independence in 1962.In the 1990s Algerian politics was dominated by the struggle involving the military and Islamist militants. In 1992 a general election won by an Islamist party was annulled, heralding a bloody civil war in which more than 150,000 people died.An amnesty in 1999 led many rebels to lay down their arms.Although political violence in Algeria has declined since the 1990s, the country has been shaken by by a campaign of bombings carried out by a group calling itself al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).The group was formerly known as the Salafist Group for Call and Combat, and has its roots in an Islamist militia involved in the civil war in the 1990s.Similiar but separate Islamist armed groups have emerged in recent years throughout the Sahara region, reinforced by arms obtained during the Libyan civil war.After years of political upheaval and violence, Algeria's economy has been given a lift by frequent oil and gas finds. It has estimated oil reserves of nearly 12 billion barrels, attracting strong interest from foreign oil firms.However, poverty remains widespread and unemployment high, particularly among Algeria's youth. Endemic government corruption and poor standards in public services are also chronic sources of popular dissatisfaction.Major protests broke out in January 2011 over food prices and unemployment, with two people being killed in clashes with security forces. The government responded by ordering cuts to the price of basic foodstuffs, and repealed the 1992 state of emergency law.In 2001 the government agreed to a series of demands by the minority Berbers, including official recognition of their language, after months of unrest.