http://www.bbc.com/news/health-18181521
Analysis: Defeating polio
Fifty-five cases. That's all the cases of polio that have been reported in the world so far this year. A lower total for mid-May than ever before.It hardly seems like it needs a shift to "emergency mode", as has been declared this week.The concern is that polio, once one of the most dreaded infections in the world, could return.After more than two decades of outstanding progress towards eliminating polio, the fear is that efforts could stumble so close to the finishing line.Polio is capable of causing crippling disability or death within hours.It plagued societies in ancient times - and was present in more than a hundred countries even in the 1980s, when it left 350,000 people paralysed each year.Cases of polio have fallen by more than 99% since the Global Polio Eradication Initiative started in 1988. All that remains is a stubborn 1%.Three countries are now at the heart of concern: Afghanistan, Nigeria and Pakistan. They are the only countries where polio is endemic. Cases in other countries spread from here.Within those three countries, the figures are worrying some. Between 2010 and 2011, cases in Afghanistan increased by 220%, in Nigeria by 185% and by 37% in Pakistan, which was responsible for a third of all cases in the world.It is easy to understand how a combination of conflict, politics, poor resources and difficult terrain combine to make a vaccination programme difficult.Last week the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moonpoetically described the threat of polio."Wild viruses and wildfires have two things in common. If neglected, they can spread out of control. If handled properly, they can be stamped out for good."Today, the flame of polio is near extinction - but sparks in three countries threaten to ignite a global blaze."There might not be a global blaze, but there has certainly been smoke on the horizon.China had its first outbreak of poliofor the first time in more than 10 years in 2011. The virus spread to Xinjiang province from bordering Pakistan.Alarge outbreak stemming from Nigeriaaffected 24 countries in west and central Africa at the end of the last decade and there have beenoutbreaks in Tajikistanas well.The concern is that many countries would not be prepared for a return of polio.Hope for the future stems from India. The country was once the epicentre of polio with more cases than any other country in the world.In February 2012 it was removed from the list of endemic countries.At the time prime minister Manmohan Singh said: "It is a matter of satisfaction that we have completed one year without any single new case of polio being reported from anywhere in the country."This gives us hope that we can finally eradicate polio not only from India but from the face of the entire mother earth. The success of our efforts shows that teamwork pays".But the entire world would need to be polio-free for three years before the disease could truly be regarded as eradicated.