http://www.bbc.com/sport/football/35272282
Annan boss Jim Chapman unsurprised by Hamilton cup upset
Annan  Athletic manager Jim Chapman says his side'sshock 4-1 Scottish Cup fourth round win over Hamilton Academicalcame as no surprise to him.The League Two leaders blew their Premiership counterparts away at Galabank to advance to the fifth round."I think the result will raise a few eyebrows, but it comes as no surprise to me," Chapman told BBC Scotland."I've got to pay tremendous credit to my players. We knew if we could get the first goal we'd give ourselves a lift."Media playback is not supported on this deviceMatt Flynn, Josh Todd and a double from Rabin Omar sealed a comprehensive victory for Annan over Accies, who could only respond with a solitary Greg Docherty strike.Chapman says he was always confident his side could take advantage of what he felt were weaknesses in the Hamilton team."We knew Hamilton were going to have a lot of the ball so we knew our organisation had to be good," Chapman said."We knew the strengths and weaknesses of Hamilton. We tried to exploit that and I thought we got the success with that."Good game plan implemented by the players and I thought they fully deserved their victory."We're in the draw, I think that's the most important thing. I think it's the first time Annan have been in the fifth round."It doesn't matter who we get. I'm quite sure a lot of teams would like to play Annan. If we can get a home draw then we know we can make a game of it against anyone."Hamilton manager Martin Canningwas dismayed by his team's lacklustre display."From our point of view obviously massively disappointing, but I must say I thought Annan played well and deserved the victory," Canning said."Our boys know they should be embarrassed by the performance. Performance levels have been good; that there isn't acceptable."I think the goals we conceded are really poor. We didn't dictate the game enough. We didn't get on the ball and be brave to play."I expected to come down here, us to control the game, control the ball. We had to deal with what they had which was turning the ball forward and we didn't deal with that at all."