http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-17405415
Armenia profile - Timeline
A chronology of key events:1915 - 1917- Between 600,000 and 1.5 million Armenians are massacred or deported from their homeland in Anatolia to present-day Syria. The Ottoman government had suspected them of harbouring pro-Russian sympathies.Armenians remember the 1.5 million they say died in last years of the Ottoman EmpireArmenians remember mass killings1916- Armenian regions of the Ottoman Empire fall to the Russian army.1918- Soviet Union, as successor to Russia, cedes all of Ottoman Armenia and part of Russian Armenia to the now moribund Ottoman Empire.1918- Independent Armenia emerges from defeat of Ottoman Empire in World War I.1920- Armenia is invaded by Turkey and Bolshevik Russia. An agreement with the Bolsheviks leads to Armenia proclaiming itself a socialist republic.1922- Armenia is incorporated into the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, USSR.1930s- Armenians suffer under Stalin's purges, but the country also experiences industrial development.1988- Encouraged by the new policy of openness ("glasnost"), Armenians begin to campaign for Nagorno-Karabakh, a region with a predominantly Armenian population in the neighbouring Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, to be united with Armenia.1988December - Earthquake in northern Armenia kills 25,000 and leaves hundreds of thousands homeless. The relief effort is slow and chaotic.Metsamor nuclear plant closed after earthquake highlights safety concerns.1989- Conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh begins. It lasts intermittently for five years. Many Azeri citizens are forced to flee their homes.1990- Armenian nationalists win parliamentary elections. Independence is declared, but ignored by Moscow.1991September - A referendum sees 94% vote for secession from the Soviet Union.1991October - Levon Ter-Petrosian elected president.1991December - Armenia joins the Commonwealth of Independent States, the successor to the Soviet Union. Armenia recognised as independent by the US.1992- Armenia joins the United Nations. A trade and energy embargo is imposed by Azerbaijan. The conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh continues.Yerevan, with Mount Ararat as backdrop, has a history spanning more than 2,500 years1994- Demonstrations in Yerevan over shortages of food and energy. A Russian-brokered ceasefire ends the Nagorno-Karabakh fighting. The region is left a self-proclaimed republic, with ethnic Armenian forces in control of Azerbaijani territory surrounding Karabakh.1995- The government launches privatisation and price liberalisation programme. Parliamentary elections return the ruling party. The powers of the president are widened.1996- Ter-Petrosian is re-elected president. Tanks are deployed on the streets of Yerevan to quell protests over alleged electoral fraud.1998- Ter-Petrosian resigns over opposition to his efforts to find a compromise with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh. Nationalist Robert Kocharian is elected president.1999- Gunmen open fire in the Armenian parliament. The prime minister, parliamentary speaker and six other officials are killed. The gunmen accuse the government of leading Armenia into political and economic ruin.2000- Prime Minister Andranik Markarian admits that - 12 years on - those affected by the 1988 earthquake are still living in a disaster zone.2001January - Becomes full member of Council of Europe.France ignores Turkish objections and introduces a law stating that Ottoman Turks committed genocide against Armenians in 1915.2001September - Vladimir Putin becomes first Russian president to visit Armenia since independence.2003March - President Robert Kocharian wins further term in second round of presidential elections. Election monitors complain of ballot-stuffing.2003May - European observers find parliamentary elections in which pro-presidential candidates win majority of seats fall short of international standards.Referendum rejects constitutional amendments concerning role of parliament.2003August - Death penalty abolished.2003December - Six sentenced to life imprisonment for their roles in 1999 parliament shootings in which prime minister, speaker and other officials were killed.The war over the enclave in the early 1990s claimed thousands of lives and still causes tensionsKarabakh's smouldering conflict2004April - Thousands of opposition supporters march against president.2005November - Referendum votes in favour of proposed constitutional amendments. Opposition protests, declaring the vote to have been rigged.2006January - Supply of gas severely disrupted after explosions in Russia damage pipeline to Armenia via Georgia.2006April - Price of Russian gas more than doubles.2007February - Parliament adopts bill allowing dual citizenship, paving the way for naturalisation of Armenia's massive foreign diaspora estimated at around 8 million.2007March - Prime Minister Andranik Markarian dies suddenly of a heart attack. He is replaced by Serge Sarkisian.2007May - Prime Minister Sarkisian's Republican Party wins almost 33% of the vote in parliamentary polls. European observers say the elections generally meet international standards.2007October - Supporters of resolution in US Congress to label mass killings of Armenians after 1915 as genocide postpone vote until timing 'more favourable'.2008February - Presidential elections. Prime Minister Serge Sarkisian is declared winner. Thousands of opposition supporters take to the streets to protest the result.2008March - Three-week state of emergency declared. Police disperse Yerevan protests amid arrests and accusations of brutality. Parliament passes law restricting public gatherings.2008September - Turkish President Abdullah Gul visits - the first time a Turkish leader has set foot in Armenia.2009October - The governments of Turkey and Armenia agree to normalise relations at a meeting in Switzerland, paving the way for moves to establish diplomatic ties and reopen the mutual border. Opposition protesters accuse government of failing to raise the genocide question.2010March - US House of Representatives' Foreign Affairs Committee passes resolution describing killing of Armenians by Turkish forces in World War I as genocide, prompting Ankara to recall its ambassador.2010April - Parliament suspends ratification of accord normalising relations with Turkey after Yerevan accuses Ankara of imposing conditions, in particular by its insistence that Armenia resolve its dispute with Azerbaijan first.2010October - Armenia and Azerbaijan agree on a Russian-brokered deal to exchange prisoners captured during Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.2011October - During a visit to Armenia, French President Nicolas Sarkozy urges Turkey to accept responsibility for the genocide of more than one million Armenians during the collapse of the Ottoman Empire.2012January - The French Senate approves a bill making it a crime to deny genocide was committed by Ottoman Turks against Armenians during World War I. Armenia dubs the vote "historic". Turkey warns of retaliatory measures.2012May - Governing Republican Party wins a majority of seats in parliamentary elections, polling 44% of the vote, with its former coalition partner the Prosperous Armenia party second on about 30%. Independent observers note minor violations.2013February - Serge Sarkisian wins a second term as president, with official results giving him nearly 59% of the vote. His nearest rival rejects the outcome.2013September - European Union asks the government to clarify its decision to join a Russian-led customs union, which derails a EU plan to conclude an association agreement with Armenia.2014November - Tensions rise over Nagorno-Karabakh after Azerbaijani forces shoot down an Armenian military helicopter, killing its three-member crew.2015January - A Russian soldier based at the base in Gyumri goes on a killing spree, killing seven people and prompting anti-Russian protests.2015February - President Serge Sarkisian withdraws from parliament the landmark 2009 agreement with Turkey to restore diplomatic ties, citing citing the absence of political will on the Turkish side.