http://www.bbc.com/news/in-pictures-30003859
Armistice Day: Your pictures
Tributes have been paid to servicemen and women who died in conflicts since the start of World War One.BBC News website readers have been sending us their photographs of commemorations on Armistice Day.Rebecca Kemp: "Five Ashes Primary School, in East Sussex, gets inspiration from the Tower of London poppies and have recreated their own version, one for every soldier named on the war memorial."Photographer David Gilliver used a special technique that involves very long exposure times to capture this image. Taken next to the World War I memorial in Guernsey in the Channel Islands, this is his tribute, entitled "Lest We Forget".Anthony Bagga: "Henley College Coventry's Uniformed Services students leading our Armistice Day service this morning in the atrium. Students, staff and nursery children all observed the two-minute silence. The wreaths laid were made by Uniformed Services students and our nursery children."Helen Young: "Wharton C of E Primary School in Winsford, Cheshire, marked the anniversary of the WWI armistice. The children were invited to come to school wearing their cubs, scouts, brownies, rainbows and boys brigade uniforms. They were joined by ex-pupils and the school caretaker who has previously served in the Navy for over 20 years."Susan Pettigrew took this photo of the memorial in Armadale, Western Australia. "Back in 1914 to 1918 Armadale was a small community. It's so sad to think of those young boys leaving to fight so far away from home. You can see the names of the unfortunate ones who didn't make it home. Lest we forget."Tom Williams took this photo of the poppies at the Tower of London, reflected in a puddle, reminiscent of the conditions in the trenches.David Allen sent in this photo of the memorial laid on Remembrance Sunday at Tower Hill.Deputy Headteacher at Whitegate End Primary School in Oldham, Mr Learmont: "The children made the poppies in class yesterday and are spending today's lessons focussing upon Remembrance Day and in particular, WW1."Students at Brownhills School, Walsall, held special events to commemorate the Centenary of World War I, including the creation of this collage.Share your pictures with us, emailyourpics@bbc.co.uk, upload themhere, or tweet@BBC_HaveYourSay.Read ourterms and conditions.