http://www.bbc.com/sport/football/14603178
Arsenal boss Arsene Wenger says he would never quit the club
Arsene Wenger has insisted he will not walk away from Arsenal despite mounting criticism after the defeat against Liverpool at The Emirates.The Gunners departed to a chorus of jeers after Liverpool recorded their first win at Arsenal for 11 years.But Wenger, who selected unsettled Manchester City target Samir Nasri, said he did not feel under "more pressure than usual"."There is no chance I would walk away", the Arsenal manager said.We are living in circumstances where every defeat is absolutely a disgrace and an earthquake"There is only one chance and that is that I will try to do my best for this club."A late own goal from Aaron Ramsey and an injury-time strike from Luis Suarez gave Kenny Dalglish's side three points.Wenger said: "We are living in circumstances where every defeat is absolutely a disgrace and an earthquake."We are very disappointed to have lost but we are at the start of the season."Arsenal also saw youngster Emmanuel Frimpong sent off and are likely to be without defender Laurent Koscielny for Wednesday's Champions League qualifier second leg against Udinese in Italy after he suffered a back spasm.He added: "I don't feel under any more pressure than usual. I feel the result was very harsh on us and the decider was the sending off. Emmanuel Frimpong was a victim of his lack of experience. He deserved a second yellow and shouldn't have gone into that tackle."Wenger said he did not know about claims that Nasri's proposed move to Manchester City had broken down - adding that he had not yet decided to whether to play, and potentially cup-tie, the France star against Udinese.He said: "I have always said I will try to keep Samir Nasri. I have never changed my mind. I played him, much to the surprise of everybody, because he loves this club and at the moment I am happy he is here."Wenger has faced demands from Arsenal's supporters to spend heavily and reinforce his squad, but he said: "The target is to have a good team and good players."You can spend money and have a bad team. We want the supporters to be happy and when we don't win games we understand they are not."Arsenal now face the Champions League qualifier and a visit to Manchester United in the next 10 days, with Wenger also trying to strengthen his squad before the close of the transfer window.We know what the boys are capable of and it is just about getting them trained to play that wayHe said: "This period will have a big impact, especially Wednesday night's game, which is massive."Reds boss Dalglish, meanwhile, said he was "delighted" with the win."It is a very difficult place to come," he said. "We knew anyone that they did play would stand up for them and play well."I thought it was a fantastic game of football. We probably just about deserved it."We know what the boys are capable of and it is just about getting them trained to play that way. If that is an indication of how quickly they have settled we have a lot to look forward to."