http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150114-where-are-our-flying-cars
Back to the Future Part II was set in 2015 ' but how accurate was its vision? Nicholas Barber takes a
We are officially living in the future. At the start of Back to the Future Part II, Marty McFly (Michael J Fox) and Doc Brown (Christopher Lloyd) zap through time to the year 2015, a dateline that seemed fabulously far-off when the film was released in 1989. Once there, Marty learns that lawyers have been abolished, clothes are self-drying, and weather forecasts can tell you the precise second when a rain shower will stop. More importantly, for a generation of young fans, the film was a cast-iron guarantee that we would own gravity-defying hoverboards and flying DeLoreans when 2015 came around. It wasn’t to be. Unless manufacturingmakes some significant progressin the next 11 months, Back to the Future Part II has misled us all.To be fair, the film’s director, Robert Zemeckis, and his co-writer, Bob Gale, didn’t do badly with their predictions. They didn’t anticipate mobile phones, and they were wrong to think that every home would have multiple fax machines in 2015, but they gave the McFly family some technology that’s remarkably similar to Skype and Google Glass. Besides, Zemeckis and Gale have always been clear that their priority was to dream up an entertaining 2015 rather than an accurate one. And, in fact, they did both: their fictional future contains plenty of elements which came true, and plenty which are so delightful that they should have come true. So how did they go about creating it?“There are two different ways of trying to imagine the future in films,” says Keith M Johnston, the author of Science Fiction Film: A Critical Introduction. “One is to do some serious, careful speculation, as in 2001: A Space Odyssey and Minority Report. When Stephen Spielberg was making that, he gathered a bunch of futureologists and asked, ‘What will the future look like? Will we have iris scanning? How will it work?’ But the other approach is just to have lots of fun, and that’s what Back to the Future Part II does. They didn’t put in hoverboards because they genuinely thought that they’d be around in 2015. They did it to mirror the scenes of Marty skateboarding in the first film.”‘Exaggerated caricature’But even if a cinematic future is intended as a comic flight of fancy, it still has to be plausible enough for viewers to accept it, and in that respect, the future envisaged by Zemeckis and Gale stands as one of the best. Robin Stoate is the co-author of the BFI Film Classics guide to Back to the Future, and for him, a key aspect is the film’s multiculturalism: Marty’s middle-aged self is fired by his Japanese boss, prefiguring the impact of Asian economies on American business.“It’s easy to make aesthetic changes when you’re planning futuristic films,” says Stoate, “but you have to take account of how society itself might have changed, too. Otherwise, you get a kind of exaggerated caricature of the present rather than a properly-imagined vision of the future. Non-white people are conspicuously absent in the 1951 disaster movie When Worlds Collide, for instance, and plenty of other science-fiction films seem to have a very narrow view of the humanity that will make it to the stars.”Zemeckis’s trick was to spot something that was already happening in reality, such as the growth of Japanese business, and then magnify it. You can see a similar tactic being used, to gloomier effect, in the dystopian sci-fi of the 1970s. Rollerball is set in 2018 and Soylent Green is set in 2022, and while neither of them is going to win any prizes for prognostication (cannibalism hasn’t taken off, for one thing), their concern with overcrowding, climate change and the dominance of multinational corporations helps them resonate today. It’s a strategy that goes back to the very earliest science-fiction movies. “I’ve seen a bunch of silent films from the 1910s,” says Johnston, “which have a Rip Van Winkle-type character falling asleep for 100 years and then waking up to find himself in a society run by women. As inaccurate as they were, these films fascinated audiences because they were a reaction to the suffragette movement. Most subsequent sci-fi films have done a similar thing. They’re rooted in their own time, because the only future we can imagine is one that looks like our own society.”That being the case, futuristic films can’t afford to be too outlandish. “Viewers have to recognise something from their own lives before they’ll accept something new,” says Johnston. “In AI: Artificial Intelligence, Spielberg introduced all sorts of magical concepts, but he mixed them in with recognisable buildings and artefacts.”‘A galaxy far, far away’According to Mark Bould, the author of the Routledge Companion To Science Fiction, it’s this mixing and matching of objects from different time periods that marks out the most credible big-screen futures, Blade Runner and Back to the Future Part II among them. “Historic costume dramas tend to make the mistake of using costumes and props from the one particular year in which they are set,” says Bould, “whereas something like Lynne Ramsay’s Ratcatcher, set in the Glasgow tenements of 1973, has houses filled with material from the ‘60s and ‘50s and earlier, the same as real people’s houses are. Flip that technique round, and you can build a future world with the same kind of heterogeneity as ours. After all, when we all have hoverboards later this year, there will still be a whole load of regular skateboards around.”One crafty way to ensure that your future civilisation echoes the current one is to shoot your film in existing locations. When Tarkovsky wanted his hero to drive through the city of tomorrow in Solaris, he simply shot the sequence in a brand new section of Tokyo; for Alphaville, Godard shot the most cutting-edge architecture of Paris’s suburbs; and Spike Jonze gave Her its alien-but-familiar atmosphere by filming its exteriors in Shanghai. In a way, Back to the Future Part II is another example: Zemeckis retains the Hill Valley town square from the first film, but updates it with digital billboards and holographic sharks.As for future technology, such as the McFly family’s videophones and flatscreen TVs, it’s essential for it to have at least some logic behind it. “If you’re focusing on gadgets and inventions,” says Stoate, “try to stick with things that could have an actual use rather than things that just look cool. The handheld communicators from the original Star Trek series are known to have directly inspired Martin Cooper, the inventor of the first mobile phone, and that’s because handheld communicators are tremendously useful devices. The atomic-powered oven, as seen in the 1968 Thunderbirds movie... perhaps not.”If developing a Back to The Future-style future still sounds too complicated, you can always try the George Lucas ploy. He opened Star Wars with a caption declaring that it all took place “a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away”, instantly silencing any questions about how feasible it was. The easiest way to make audiences accept your vision of the future, it seems, is to set it in the past.If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.