http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-34257212
Battle of Britain anniversary: Your pictures and memories
A flypast involving around 40 Spitfires and Hurricanes has marked the 75th anniversary of the Battle of Britain.The grouping - the biggest in one place since the war - took off in waves from Goodwood airfield in West Sussex before dispersing around the region.There was also a memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral attended by veterans.Here are some of your pictures and comments.Carol Penny, Bognor Regis, West Sussex, UK:We celebrated the flypast at Goodwood. Wonderful atmosphere, folks from all over south England and beyond. What a memorable occasion to see all these planes in one place. The planes and their young brave crews gave their all for us and we should remember and be grateful.Mike Miller, Pembury, Kent, UK:Living during the war, from the age of six to 12, in the South East suburbs close to London my brother and I witnessed many dogfights and enemy action. Sometimes two or three Spitfires or Hurricanes flew low over the rooftops where we lived. Suddenly we felt absolutely safe. With those chaps around no enemy could touch us. Even today in my 80s I get emotional at the sound of a Merlin engine.John Parishadded that his father was a navigator in the Fleet Air Arm, a memory which "brings home how brave these men were". John alsofilmedthe flypast and captured the incredible sound of those engines.Michele Sanders, Peacehaven, East Sussex, UK:I didn't get the clearest of photos on Peacehaven Cliff top. But whilst watching three groups of Spitfire planes coming over our way, I did meet a wonderful man of 91 years who had travelled down from Reigate especially to watch the flypast. At the age of 18, he was flying in Lancaster bombers, coincidentally with the same Lincolnshire regiment as my uncle, who had died aged 22 in June 1944 during a night flying exercise over Norfolk. It was amazing to be able to say to one of these brave young men: "Thank you very much".George Luck, Ontario, Canada:I would have had two uncles. One flew for Bomber Command. He left Canada a promising pianist and flew Lancasters. He never came home again and now lies for eternity under the blue skies in which he flew. My other uncle left Canada as a very young office runner and came home a decorated squadron leader. He flew Spitfires in the skies of England. Though he lived to a ripe old age, when you looked in his blue eyes it was clear that, even 60 years later, he was still a Spitfire pilot. It was men like these from all over the world who came to the aid of the "Mother Country" in those dark days.But it wasn't just the male pilots people wanted to remember today:David Gill, US:I saw the battle of Britain from the ground up as a 14-year-old living in Dorking, Surrey. September 15 1940 was the big day. There was a large air battle over Dorking. We could see the London Docks burning later. But not many bombs were dropped on Dorking. That period was exciting for me as a teenager but the "flying bombs" and "V11s" that came later were frightening.Meirion Underhill, Farnborough, UK:I have just seen six Spitfires fly over. I have seen Spitfires many times since a child as it was my late father's favourite aircraft but never have I seen six.  A moment to remember and a moment to be proud of what our forefathers did to keep this country British.Not everyone was happy with the flypast asTerry Quirke in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, UK notes: "The historic flypast marking the 75th anniversary will be a sight to behold if you live on or around the coast. The bulk of Spitfires were made in Castle Bromwich. In fact, the oldest flying Spitfire was built there."He went on to say: "My mum worked there during that time. It is rather sad that there will be no flypast at all over Castle Bromwich or its locality. It's a shame for the few who are still alive who helped to build these iconic aircraft."Terry was not the only one who would have liked to see the flypast:Peter Stallard was disappointed: I live about three miles from Romford. I just saw five Spitfires way in the distance. I had been waiting since 12 noon. It would have been nice to see them all and closer.Doug Murphy, Southampton, UK:I planned my viewing according to the published maps showing where the various groups were due to fly; the one I was due to see went from Goodwood to the Isle of Wight, then up to Salisbury and back to Goodwood. I watched (with many others) just to the east of Fordingbridge, but not a single plane passed over. Ironically, it would appear that had I stayed at home in Southampton I might well have had a perfect view of the re-routed event!Produced by Victoria Park